.. _ipcluster-plugin:

######################
IPython Cluster Plugin
######################
.. _IPython: http://ipython.org
.. note::

    These docs are for `IPython`_ 0.12+ which is installed in the latest
    StarCluster 11.10 Ubuntu-based AMIs. See `starcluster listpublic` for
    a list of available AMIs.

To configure your cluster as an `interactive IPython cluster`_ you must first
define the ``ipcluster`` plugin in your config file:

.. _interactive IPython cluster: http://ipython.org/ipython-doc/stable/parallel/parallel_intro.html#introduction

.. code-block:: ini

    [plugin ipcluster]
    setup_class = starcluster.plugins.ipcluster.IPCluster

If you'd like to use the new IPython web notebook (highly recommended!) you'll
also want to add the following settings:

.. code-block:: ini

    [plugin ipcluster]
    setup_class = starcluster.plugins.ipcluster.IPCluster
    enable_notebook = True
    # set a password for the notebook for increased security
    notebook_passwd = a-secret-password

After defining the plugin in your config, add the ipcluster plugin to the list
of plugins in one of your cluster templates:

.. code-block:: ini

    [cluster smallcluster]
    plugins = ipcluster

.. _using-ipython-cluster:

*************************
Using the IPython Cluster
*************************
To use your new IPython cluster log in directly to the master node of the
cluster as the ``CLUSTER_USER`` and create a parallel client::

    $ starcluster sshmaster mycluster -u myuser
    $ ipython
    [~]> from IPython.parallel import Client
    [~]> rc = Client(packer='pickle')

Once the client has been started, create a 'view' over the entire cluster and
begin running parallel tasks. Below is an example of performing a parallel map
across all nodes in the cluster::

    [~]> view = rc[:]
    [~]> results = view.map_async(lambda x: x**30, range(8))
    [~]> print results.get()
    [0,
     1,
     1073741824,
     205891132094649L,
     1152921504606846976L,
     931322574615478515625L,
     221073919720733357899776L,
     22539340290692258087863249L]

.. _IPython parallel docs: http://ipython.org/ipython-doc/stable/parallel
.. seealso::

    See the `IPython parallel docs`_ (0.12+) to learn more about the IPython
    parallel API

***********************************************
Connecting from your Local IPython Installation
***********************************************
.. note::

    You must have IPython 0.12+ installed to use this feature

If you'd rather control the cluster from your *local* IPython installation use
the ``shell`` command and pass the ``--ipcluster`` option::

    $ starcluster shell --ipcluster=mycluster

This will start StarCluster's development shell and configure a remote parallel
session for you automatically. StarCluster will create a parallel client in a
variable named ``ipclient`` and a corresponding view of the entire cluster in a
variable named ``ipview`` which you can use to run parallel tasks on the remote
cluster::

    $ starcluster shell --ipcluster=mycluster
    [~]> ipclient.ids
    [0, 1, 2, 3]
    [~]> res = ipview.map_async(lambda x: x**30, range(8))
    [~]> print res.get()

***********************************************
Using IPython Parallel Scripts with StarCluster
***********************************************
If you wish to run parallel IPython scripts from your local machine that run on
the remote cluster you will need to use the following configuration when
creating the parallel client in your code::

    from IPython.parallel import Client
    rc = Client('~/.starcluster/ipcluster/<cluster>-<region>.json'
                sshkey='/path/to/cluster/keypair.rsa'
                packer='pickle')

For example, let's say we started a cluster called 'mycluster' in region
'us-east-1' with keypair 'mykey' stored in /home/user/.ssh/mykey.rsa. In this
case the above config should be updated to::

    from IPython.parallel import Client
    rc = Client('/home/user/.starcluster/ipcluster/mycluster-us-east-1.json'
                sshkey='/home/user/.ssh/mykey.rsa'
                packer='pickle')

.. _ipython-notebook:

*******************************
Using the IPython HTML Notebook
*******************************

.. _IPython web notebook: http://ipython.org/ipython-doc/stable/interactive/htmlnotebook.html

The IPython cluster plugin comes with support for the new `IPython web
notebook`_. As mentioned in the intro section, you will need to specify a few
extra settings in the IPython cluster plugin's config in order to use the web
notebook:

.. code-block:: ini

    [plugin ipcluster]
    setup_class = starcluster.plugins.ipcluster.IPCluster
    enable_notebook = True
    # set a password for the notebook for increased security
    notebook_passwd = a-secret-password

The ``notebook_passwd`` setting specifies the password to set on the remote
IPython notebook server. If you do not specify the ``notebook_passwd`` setting
the plugin will randomly generate a password for you. You will be required to
enter this password in order to login and use the notebook server on the
cluster. In addition to enforcing a notebook password, StarCluster also enables
SSL in the notebook server in order to secure the transmission of your password
when logging in.

Once you have these settings in the plugin's config simply start a cluster and
let the plugin configure your IPython cluster::

    $ starcluster start iptest
    StarCluster - (http://star.mit.edu/cluster)
    Software Tools for Academics and Researchers (STAR)
    Please submit bug reports to starcluster@mit.edu

    ... (abbreviated output)
    >>> Running plugin ipcluster
    >>> Writing IPython cluster config files
    >>> Starting IPython cluster with 9 engines
    >>> Waiting for JSON connector file...
    >>> Saving JSON connector file to 'iptest-us-east-1.json'
    iptest-us-east-1.json 100% ||||||||||||||||||||||||| Time: 00:00:00   0.00 B/s
    >>> Setting up IPython web notebook for user: myuser
    >>> Creating SSL certificate for user myuser
    >>> Authorizing tcp port 8888 on 0.0.0.0/0
    >>> IPython notebook URL: https://ec2-99-99-99-99.compute-1.amazonaws.com:8888
    >>> The notebook password is: XXXXXXXXX
    >>> IPCluster has been started on iptest for user 'myuser'.
    >>> IPCluster took 0.247 mins

Pay special attention to the following two lines as you'll need them to login
to the cluster's IPython notebook server from your web browser::

    >>> IPython notebook URL: https://ec2-XXXX.compute-1.amazonaws.com:8888
    >>> The notebook password is: XXXXXXXXX

Navigate to the given *https* address and use the password to login:

.. image:: /_static/ipnotebooklogin.png

After you've logged in you should be looking at IPython's dashboard page:

.. image:: /_static/ipnotebookdashboard.png

Since this is a brand new cluster there aren't any existing IPython notebook's
to play with. Click the ``New Notebook`` button to create a new IPython notebook:

.. image:: /_static/ipnotebooknew.png

This will create a new blank IPython notebook. To begin using the notebook,
click inside the first input cell and begin typing some Python code. You can
enter multiple lines of code in one cell if you like. When you're ready to
execute your code press ``shift-enter``. This will execute the code in the
current cell and show any output in a new `output` cell below.

You can modify existing cells simply by clicking in the cell, changing some
text, and pressing ``shift-enter`` again to re-run the cell. While a cell is
being executed you will notice that the IPython notebook goes into a `busy`
mode:

.. image:: /_static/ipnotebookbusy.png

You can keep adding and executing more cells to the notebook while in `busy`
mode, however, the cells will run in the order they were executed one after the
other. Only one cell can be running at a time.

Once you've finished adding content to your notebook you can save your work to
the cluster by pressing the ``save`` button. Since this is a new notebook you
should  also change the name before saving which will temporarily change the
``save`` button to ``rename``:

.. image:: /_static/ipnotebookrename.png

This will save the notebook to ``<notebook title>.ipynb`` in your
``CLUSTER_USER``'s home folder. If you've configured StarCluster to mount an
EBS volume on ``/home`` then these notebook files will automatically be saved
to the EBS volume when the cluster shuts down. If this is not the case you will
want to download the notebook files before you terminate the cluster if you
wish to save them:

.. image:: /_static/ipnotebookdownload.png

Press ``ctrl-m h`` within the web notebook to see all available keyboard
shortcuts and commands

.. _official IPython notebook docs: http://ipython.org/ipython-doc/stable/interactive/htmlnotebook.html#basic-usage

.. seealso::

    See the `official IPython notebook docs`_ for more details on using the IPython notebook

**********************************************
Using Parallel IPython in the IPython Notebook
**********************************************
It's also very easy to combine the notebook with IPython's parallel framework
running on StarCluster to create an HPC-powered notebook. Simply use the same
commands described in the :ref:`using-ipython-cluster` section to set up a
parallel client and view in the notebook:

.. image:: /_static/ipnotebookparallel.png
